Hello again!
In this video, we are going to have a quick overview of parallelism.
People often use "concurrency" and "parallelism" to describe the same thing,
but there is actually an important
difference between them.
With concurrency, you have tasks which are conceptually distinct.
So these are different threads which are doing different things.
This is what is known as separation of concerns.
So, for example, having the GUI application where we have one thread which handles events and other threads
which handle various tasks.
And it is possible for a concurrent program to run on a single processor core.
These tasks are usually interactive.
They can often wait for an event or they can wait for other tasks
to complete or to do something, and they can also exchange data with each other.
When it comes down
to it,
concurrency is really a feature of the program structure.
It is the way you design the program, to separate concerns.
When you have parallelism, on the other hand, you have many instances of the same task of running
at the same time.
So all these tasks are basically doing the same thing,
but they are running on multiple cores at the
same time to improve scalability.
And these tasks are usually pretty much independent of each other.
Parallelism is a feature of the algorithm that is being performed.
There are some algorithms where it naturally makes sense to divide the data into different groups and
then have each group processed at the same time.
There is actually a very good sporting analogy.
Concurrency is like a team sport, so everyone has a distinct role.
Usually players are doing different things.
They interact with each other.
They wait to get the ball.
They wait for other players to go into position.
They wait for various events to happen and so on.
Parallelism is more like an individual track sport.
So, for example, sprinting, swimming and so on, everyone is doing the same thing
and they are all
trying to do it as fast as possible.
And there is no interaction between them or very little.
There are two different ways of doing parallelism, explicit and implicit.
When you do it explicitly,
you specify how exactly it should be done in parallel.
For example, you divide your data into four parts and you start up four threads, each of which will
process one quarter of the data.
This involves more work for the programmer, but it can produce better performance.
The problem is it is not scalable.
If you have a machine which supports four threads and you have four threads,
then it is working flat
out.
If you buy a new computer which has support for eight threads,
then you are still only running four
threads.
So your program still runs at the same speed, even though you have twice as much processing capacity.
One of the main situations where you would use this is if you are writing for a specific bit of hardware,
A good example of that is a game console.
Each generation of game consoles has a fixed number of processors.
So you can actually tune your program for the number of processors.
It is also useful if the problem you are trying to solve naturally divides into a fixed number of tasks.
The other form of parallelism is implicit.
This is where the programmer does not do anything, you just leave it up to the compiler and the environment
to decide how to do it.
And this means that you will always make the best use of the resources that are available.
In the situation where you go from having a computer with four processor cores to having eight, then
implicit parallelism means that you will automatically get eight threads instead of four.
And for most purposes, this is the best option.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!